quick-start/index.md, before:

---
title: Getting Started in Java
headline: Documentation
bodyclass: docs
layout: docs
---

[//]: <> (The base path for code samples is `_samples/examples/src/main/`.)
[//]: <> (Change it to `_examples/hello/`.)

# Getting started with Spine in Java

<p class="lead">This guide will walk you through a minimal client-server application in Java
which handles one command to print some text on behalf of the current computer user. The document
goes through already written code which is quite simple. So, it won't take long.
</p>

## What we'll do
We'll go through the example which shows a Bounded Context called “Hello”. 
The context has one `ProcessManager`, which handles the `Print` command
sent from the client-side code to the server-side code, which hosts the context.

## What you'll need
1.  JDK version 8 or higher.
2.  Git.
3.  The source code of the [Hello World](https://github.com/spine-examples/hello) example.
    ```bash
    git clone git@github.com:spine-examples/hello.git
    ```

## Run the code
To check that you've got everything installed, please run the following command:
```bash
./gradlew :sayHello
```
If you're under Windows, it would be:
```
gradlew.bat :sayHello
```
This would build and execute the example. 
The process should finish with the output which looks like this:

```
> Task :sayHello
Jun 04, 2020 5:04:55 PM io.spine.server.Server lambda$start$1
INFO: In-process server started with the name `318ea6c4-283e-4c43-b367-93310b703d31`.
[sanders] Hello World!
The client received the event: io.spine.helloworld.hello.event.Printed{"username":"sanders","text":"Hello World!"}
Jun 04, 2020 5:04:57 PM io.spine.server.Server shutdown
INFO: Shutting down the server...
Jun 04, 2020 5:04:57 PM io.spine.server.Server shutdown
INFO: Server shut down.
```  
The first line tells which Gradle task we run. The following couple of lines is the server-side
logging that informs us that the server was started. 

The line with “Hello World!” text is the “meat” of this example suite. 
It is what our `ProcessManager` (called `Console`) does in response to the `Print` command received
from the `Client`. 
The text in between brackets is the name of the current computer user. The name was passed as
the argument of the `Print` command.

<p class="note">We opted to show a `ProcessManager` — instead of an `Aggregate` — because
the console output is similar to an “External System”. Dealing with things like
that is the job of Process Managers. We also want to highlight the importance of using
this architectural pattern.</p>

The output that follows is the logging produced by the `Client` class as it receives the `Printed`
event from the server.

Then, the server shuts down concluding the example.   

Now, let's dive into the code.
 
## Project structure
For the sake of simplicity, this example is organised as a single-module Gradle project.
Most likely, a project for a real world application would be multi-module.

### The root directory
The root of the project contains the following files:
  * `LICENSE` — the text of the Apache v2 license under which the framework and
     this example are licensed.
  * `README.md` — a brief intro for the example.
  * `gradlew` and `gradlew.bat` — scripts for running Gradle Wrapper.
  * **`build.gradle`** — the project configuration. We'll review this file later
    [in details](#adding-spine-to-a-gradle-project).

<p class="note">The root directory also contains “invisible” files, names of which start with
the dot (e.g. `.gitattributes` and `.travis.yml`).
These files configure Git and CI systems we use. They are not directly related to the subject
of the example and this guide. If you're interested in this level of details,
please look into the code and comments in these files.
</p>    

Here are the directories of interest in the project root:
 * `gradle` — this directory contains the code of Gradle Wrapper and two Gradle scripts
    used in the [project configuration](#other-project-configuration).
 * **`generated`** — this directory contains the code generated by Protobuf Compiler and 
    Spine Model Compiler. This directory and code it contains is created automatically
    when a domain model changes. This directory is <em>excluded</em> from version control.
 * **`src`** — contains the handcrafted source code.

Let's see how the source code is structured.

### The `src` directory
The source code directory follows standard Gradle conventions and has two sub-directories:
  * **`main`** — the production code;
  * **`tests`**.

The production code consists of two parts allocated by sub-directories:
  * **`proto`** — contains the definition of data structures in Google Protobuf.
    A domain model definition starts from adding the code to this directory. 
    Then, the Protobuf code is compiled to the languages of the project. 
    The output of this process is placed into the `generated` directory, with a sub-directory
    for each language. This example uses only Java.
    
  * **`java`** — this directory contains the model behavior and other server- and client-side code.
    A real project would have these parts in separate modules or projects. We put it all
    together for the sake of simplicity. 

Now, let's review the code in details, starting with how to add Spine to a Gradle project.

## Adding Spine to a Gradle project
Let's open `build.gradle` from the root of the project. The simplest and recommended way for
adding Spine dependencies to a project is the Bootstrap plugin:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/build.gradle" start="*plugins*" end="*}*"?>
```groovy
plugins {
    id 'io.spine.tools.gradle.bootstrap' version '1.5.24'
}
```
Once the plugin is added, we can use its features:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/build.gradle" 
             start="*spine.enableJava()*" 
             end="*spine.enableJava()*"?>
```groovy
spine.enableJava().server()
```
This enables Java in the module and adds necessary dependencies and configurations.

<p class="note">Calling `spine.enableJava().server()` adds both server- and client-side dependencies.
This way a module of a Bounded Context “A” may be a client for a Bounded Context “B”. 
Client-side applications or modules should call: `spine.enableJava().client()`.
</p>

### Other project configuration

The rest of the `build.gradle` file does the following:
 1. Sets the version of Java to 8.

 2. Adds `generated` code directories to IntelliJ IDEA module by applying the `idea.gradle`
    script plugin. 
    
    <p class="note">The framework does not depend on IDEA or its Gradle plugin.
    We added this code because we use this IDE for development.
    If you use it too, you may want look into `idea.gradle` to configure your Spine-based 
    projects similarly.</p>
    
 3. Adds JUnit dependencies by applying the `tests.gradle` script plugin. 
    
    <p class="note">We chose to extract this and previous scripts into separate files to simplify
     the code of `build.gradle`.</p>
    
 4. Defines the `sayHello` task which runs the `Example` application, which orchestrates
    the demo.  

We are not reviewing these parts of the project configuration deeper because they are not
related to the use of the Spine framework. If you're interested in more details, please look into
the code of these scripts.

Now, let's look into the data structure of the Hello context. 
 
## Hello context data

The data types of the Hello context are defined under the `src/main/proto/hello` directory with
the following files:

  * **`commands.proto`** — this file defines the `Print` command.
  
    <p class="note">By convention, commands are defined in a file with the `commands` suffix
     in its name. It can be, for example, `order_commands.proto` or just `commands.proto`
     like in our example.</p>
     
  * **`events.proto`** — this file defines the `Printed` event.
  
    <p class="note">Similarly to commands, events are defined in proto files having the `events`
    suffix in their names.</p>

These two files define signals used by the Hello context. There's also data of the `Console`
Process Manager, which is defined in the package **`server`** in the file **`console.proto`**.

<p class="note">
We arrange the sub-package `server` to highlight the fact that this is server-only data. It is not
a convention used by the framework. We find the clarity of this infix useful when creating
cloud applications. So, we share it as a recommendation in this example.</p>

Let's review the context data definition in details.

### The `commands.proto` file

After the copyright header the file starts with the syntax declaration. The framework supports only
this version of the Protobuf dialect:
```proto     
syntax = "proto3";
```

Then follows the import statement for custom options used when defining data types. This import is
required for all proto files of a Spine-based project.
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*spine/options*" 
             end="*spine/options*"?>  
```proto
import "spine/options.proto";
```

The following file-wide option defines the prefix for type names used in this file.
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option (type_url_prefix)*" 
             end="*option (type_url_prefix)*"?>  
```proto
option (type_url_prefix) = "type.spine.io";
```
This prefix is needed for recognizing binary data when it's unpacked. Most likely, all types
in a system would use the same prefix.

Then we see the standard Protobuf option for defining a Java package for the generated code:
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option java_package*" 
             end="*option java_package*"?>  
```proto
option java_package="io.spine.helloworld.hello.command";
``` 
There are three parts of interest in this package name:
  * **`io.spine.helloworld`** — this part represents the location of our Hello World “solution”
    as if it were hosted on the web at `https://helloworld.spine.io`.
     
  * **`hello`** — this is the package of the Hello context. In this example we have only one, but
     a real world app would have more. Each Bounded Context goes into a dedicated package.
     
  * **`command`** — this part gathers commands of the context under one package.
     We have only one command in this example, but in real world scenarios, with dozens of commands,
     it is convenient to gather them under a package.  

The following standard proto file option defines the name for the outer class generated by
Protobuf Compiler for this `.proto` file: 
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option java_outer_classname*" 
             end="*option java_outer_classname*"?>  
```proto
option java_outer_classname = "CommandsProto";
```

<p class="note">Outer classes are used by Protobuf implementation internally.
When the `java_outer_classname` option is omitted, Protobuf Compiler would calculate the Java
class name taking the name of the corresponding `.proto` file. 
We recommend setting the name directly to make it straight. This also avoids possible name clashes
with the handcrafted code.</p> 

The next standard option instructs the Protobuf Compiler to put each generated Java type into
a separate file. This way it would be easier to analyze dependencies of the code which uses these
generated types.
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option java_multiple_files*" 
             end="*option java_multiple_files*"?>  
```proto
option java_multiple_files = true;
```
     
The command for printing a text in a console is defined this way:
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*message Print*" 
             end="*}"?>  
```proto
message Print {

    // The login name of the computer user.
    string username = 1;

    // The text to print.
    string text = 2 [(required) = true];
}
```

By convention, the first field of a command is the ID of the target entity.
This field is required to have a non-empty value so that the command can be dispatched to
the entity. In our case, we identify a console by the login name of the computer user.  

The second field is marked as `(required)` using the custom option imported in
the `spine/options.proto` file above. This command does not make much sense if there is no text
to print.

<p class="note">In Protobuf a data type is either a **`message`** (we can send it) or an **`enum`**.
If you're new to this language, you may want to look at the [Proto3 Language Guide][proto3-guide].  
</p>

Now, let's see how to define events. 

### The `events.proto` file

Events are declared similarly to commands. The header of the file has:

 * The `proto3` syntax declaration.
 * The `hello` package declaration.
 * The import statement for custom Protobuf options used by the framework:
    
    ```proto
    import "spine/options.proto";
    ```

 * The same `(type_url_prefix)` we use in this project.
 * A separate Java package for events of the context:
    
    ```proto
    option java_package="io.spine.helloworld.hello.event";
    ```
 * The outer Java class for all types in this file:
 
    ```proto
    option java_outer_classname = "EventsProto";
    ```     
    
 * The instruction to put Java types into separate files.

    ```proto
    option java_multiple_files = true;
    ```

The sole event in this project is declared this way:

The command for printing a text in a console is defined this way:
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/events.proto" 
             start="*message Printed*" 
             end="*}"?>
```proto 
message Printed {

    // The login name of the user.
    string username = 1 [(required) = true];

    // The printed text.
    string text = 2 [(required) = true];
}
```

The event tells which text was printed for a user. Both of the fields are marked as `(required)`
because the event does not make much sense if one of them is empty. 

<p class="note">
Unlike for commands, the framework does not assume that the first event field is <em>always</em>
populated. This is so because default routing rules for commands and events are different. 
When an event is produced by some entity, it remembers the ID of this producer entity. 
By default, the framework uses the producer ID to route events to their target entities — 
if they have identifiers of the same type.  If the type of producer ID does not match one of the
target entity, then event fields are analyzed. It is also possible to set custom routing rules.
</p>   

Now, let's see the server-side data of the Hello context.

### The `console.proto` file
The header of the file is similar to those we saw in `commands.proto` and `events.proto`. 
The difference is that we use `server` for the proto and Java package names to make sure the 
server-only is not used by the client code.
 
This file defines a single data type. It is the state of the entity handling the `Print` command:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/server/console.proto" 
             start="*message Output*" 
             end="*}"?>
```proto
message Output {
    option (entity) = { kind: PROCESS_MANAGER };

    // The login name of the computer user.
    string username = 1;

    // Text lines of the screen.
    repeated string lines = 2;
}
```

The option `(entity)` tells us that this type is going to be used by a `ProcessManager`.
The first field of the type holds and ID of this entity. The framework assumes such fields as
implicitly `(required)`. Then goes the declaration of the remote screen output.  The value of this
field is empty until something is printed on the screen. Therefore, it is not marked `(required)`.

Now, let's see how this data is used at the server-side.

## The `Console` class

The class is declared this way:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*class Console*" 
             end="*class Console*"?>
```java
final class Console extends ProcessManager<String, Output, Output.Builder> {
```
The generic arguments passed to `ProcessManager` are:
 1. `String` — the type of the ID of the entity. Remember the type
of the first field of the `Print` command?

 2. `Output` — the type of the entity state, which we reviewed in the previous section.

 3. `Output.Builder` — the type used to modify the state of the entity.
    In Protobuf for Java, each message type has a specific builder type. 

### Handling the `Print` command

The command is handled by this method:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*@Assign*" 
             end="    }*"?>
```java
@Assign
Printed handle(Print command) {
    String username = command.getUsername();
    String text = command.getText();
    builder().setUsername(username)
             .addLines(text);
    println(username, text);
    return Printed
            .newBuilder()
            .setUsername(username)
            .setText(command.getText())
            .vBuild();
}
```

Let's review the method in details.

The `@Assign` annotation tells that we assign this method to handle the command which the
method accepts as the parameter. The method returns the event message `Printed`.

The following code obtains the name of the user and the text to print from the received command,
and then applies them to the state of the Process Manager. Instances of the `Console` class store
the text printed for each user.

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*String username*" 
             end="*addLines(text);*"?>
```java
String username = command.getUsername();
String text = command.getText();
builder().setUsername(username)
         .addLines(text);
```
  
Then we print the text to `System.out` so that it becomes visible on the screen:    
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*println(username*" 
             end="*println(username*"?>
```java
println(username, text);
```

This is done by the method the `Console` class declares:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*private void println(*" 
             end="    }*"?>
```java
private void println(String userName, String text) {
    String output = format("[%s] %s", userName, text);
    System.out.println(output);
}
```

Then, the command-handling method concludes by producing the event message:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*return Printed*" 
             end="*vBuild();*"?>
```java
return Printed
        .newBuilder()
        .setUsername(username)
        .setText(command.getText())
        .vBuild();
```
<p class="note">The event is posted to the `EventBus` and delivered to the subscribers by
the framework automatically. You don't need to write any code for this.</p>  

Now, let's see how the `Console` Process Manager is exposed to the outer world.

## Assembling the Hello Context

<p class="lead">To be continued...</p>
     

[proto3-guide]: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3

Commit message:

Add note on Validation library

quick-start/index.md, after:

---
title: Getting Started in Java
headline: Documentation
bodyclass: docs
layout: docs
---

[//]: <> (The base path for code samples is `_samples/examples/src/main/`.)
[//]: <> (Change it to `_examples/hello/`.)

# Getting started with Spine in Java

<p class="lead">This guide will walk you through a minimal client-server application in Java
which handles one command to print some text on behalf of the current computer user. The document
goes through already written code which is quite simple. So, it won't take long.
</p>

## What we'll do
We'll go through the example which shows a Bounded Context called “Hello”. 
The context has one `ProcessManager`, which handles the `Print` command
sent from the client-side code to the server-side code, which hosts the context.

## What you'll need
1.  JDK version 8 or higher.
2.  Git.
3.  The source code of the [Hello World](https://github.com/spine-examples/hello) example.
    ```bash
    git clone git@github.com:spine-examples/hello.git
    ```

## Run the code
To check that you've got everything installed, please run the following command:
```bash
./gradlew :sayHello
```
If you're under Windows, it would be:
```
gradlew.bat :sayHello
```
This would build and execute the example. 
The process should finish with the output which looks like this:

```
> Task :sayHello
Jun 04, 2020 5:04:55 PM io.spine.server.Server lambda$start$1
INFO: In-process server started with the name `318ea6c4-283e-4c43-b367-93310b703d31`.
[sanders] Hello World!
The client received the event: io.spine.helloworld.hello.event.Printed{"username":"sanders","text":"Hello World!"}
Jun 04, 2020 5:04:57 PM io.spine.server.Server shutdown
INFO: Shutting down the server...
Jun 04, 2020 5:04:57 PM io.spine.server.Server shutdown
INFO: Server shut down.
```  
The first line tells which Gradle task we run. The following couple of lines is the server-side
logging that informs us that the server was started. 

The line with “Hello World!” text is the “meat” of this example suite. 
It is what our `ProcessManager` (called `Console`) does in response to the `Print` command received
from the `Client`. 
The text in between brackets is the name of the current computer user. The name was passed as
the argument of the `Print` command.

<p class="note">We opted to show a `ProcessManager` — instead of an `Aggregate` — because
the console output is similar to an “External System”. Dealing with things like
that is the job of Process Managers. We also want to highlight the importance of using
this architectural pattern.</p>

The output that follows is the logging produced by the `Client` class as it receives the `Printed`
event from the server.

Then, the server shuts down concluding the example.   

Now, let's dive into the code.
 
## Project structure
For the sake of simplicity, this example is organised as a single-module Gradle project.
Most likely, a project for a real world application would be multi-module.

### The root directory
The root of the project contains the following files:
  * `LICENSE` — the text of the Apache v2 license under which the framework and
     this example are licensed.
  * `README.md` — a brief intro for the example.
  * `gradlew` and `gradlew.bat` — scripts for running Gradle Wrapper.
  * **`build.gradle`** — the project configuration. We'll review this file later
    [in details](#adding-spine-to-a-gradle-project).

<p class="note">The root directory also contains “invisible” files, names of which start with
the dot (e.g. `.gitattributes` and `.travis.yml`).
These files configure Git and CI systems we use. They are not directly related to the subject
of the example and this guide. If you're interested in this level of details,
please look into the code and comments in these files.
</p>    

Here are the directories of interest in the project root:
 * `gradle` — this directory contains the code of Gradle Wrapper and two Gradle scripts
    used in the [project configuration](#other-project-configuration).
 * **`generated`** — this directory contains the code generated by Protobuf Compiler and 
    Spine Model Compiler. This directory and code it contains is created automatically
    when a domain model changes. This directory is <em>excluded</em> from version control.
 * **`src`** — contains the handcrafted source code.

Let's see how the source code is structured.

### The `src` directory
The source code directory follows standard Gradle conventions and has two sub-directories:
  * **`main`** — the production code;
  * **`tests`**.

The production code consists of two parts allocated by sub-directories:
  * **`proto`** — contains the definition of data structures in Google Protobuf.
    A domain model definition starts from adding the code to this directory. 
    Then, the Protobuf code is compiled to the languages of the project. 
    The output of this process is placed into the `generated` directory, with a sub-directory
    for each language. This example uses only Java.
    
  * **`java`** — this directory contains the model behavior and other server- and client-side code.
    A real project would have these parts in separate modules or projects. We put it all
    together for the sake of simplicity. 

Now, let's review the code in details, starting with how to add Spine to a Gradle project.

## Adding Spine to a Gradle project
Let's open `build.gradle` from the root of the project. The simplest and recommended way for
adding Spine dependencies to a project is the Bootstrap plugin:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/build.gradle" start="*plugins*" end="*}*"?>
```groovy
plugins {
    id 'io.spine.tools.gradle.bootstrap' version '1.5.24'
}
```
Once the plugin is added, we can use its features:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/build.gradle" 
             start="*spine.enableJava()*" 
             end="*spine.enableJava()*"?>
```groovy
spine.enableJava().server()
```
This enables Java in the module and adds necessary dependencies and configurations.

<p class="note">Calling `spine.enableJava().server()` adds both server- and client-side dependencies.
This way a module of a Bounded Context “A” may be a client for a Bounded Context “B”. 
Client-side applications or modules should call: `spine.enableJava().client()`.
</p>

### Other project configuration

The rest of the `build.gradle` file does the following:
 1. Sets the version of Java to 8.

 2. Adds `generated` code directories to IntelliJ IDEA module by applying the `idea.gradle`
    script plugin. 
    
    <p class="note">The framework does not depend on IDEA or its Gradle plugin.
    We added this code because we use this IDE for development.
    If you use it too, you may want look into `idea.gradle` to configure your Spine-based 
    projects similarly.</p>
    
 3. Adds JUnit dependencies by applying the `tests.gradle` script plugin. 
    
    <p class="note">We chose to extract this and previous scripts into separate files to simplify
     the code of `build.gradle`.</p>
    
 4. Defines the `sayHello` task which runs the `Example` application, which orchestrates
    the demo.  

We are not reviewing these parts of the project configuration deeper because they are not
related to the use of the Spine framework. If you're interested in more details, please look into
the code of these scripts.

Now, let's look into the data structure of the Hello context. 
 
## Hello context data

The data types of the Hello context are defined under the `src/main/proto/hello` directory with
the following files:

  * **`commands.proto`** — this file defines the `Print` command.
  
    <p class="note">By convention, commands are defined in a file with the `commands` suffix
     in its name. It can be, for example, `order_commands.proto` or just `commands.proto`
     like in our example.</p>
     
  * **`events.proto`** — this file defines the `Printed` event.
  
    <p class="note">Similarly to commands, events are defined in proto files having the `events`
    suffix in their names.</p>

These two files define signals used by the Hello context. There's also data of the `Console`
Process Manager, which is defined in the package **`server`** in the file **`console.proto`**.

<p class="note">
We arrange the sub-package `server` to highlight the fact that this is server-only data. It is not
a convention used by the framework. We find the clarity of this infix useful when creating
cloud applications. So, we share it as a recommendation in this example.</p>

Let's review the context data definition in details.

### The `commands.proto` file

After the copyright header the file starts with the syntax declaration. The framework supports only
this version of the Protobuf dialect:
```proto     
syntax = "proto3";
```

Then follows the import statement for custom options used when defining data types. This import is
required for all proto files of a Spine-based project.
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*spine/options*" 
             end="*spine/options*"?>  
```proto
import "spine/options.proto";
```

The following file-wide option defines the prefix for type names used in this file.
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option (type_url_prefix)*" 
             end="*option (type_url_prefix)*"?>  
```proto
option (type_url_prefix) = "type.spine.io";
```
This prefix is needed for recognizing binary data when it's unpacked. Most likely, all types
in a system would use the same prefix.

Then we see the standard Protobuf option for defining a Java package for the generated code:
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option java_package*" 
             end="*option java_package*"?>  
```proto
option java_package="io.spine.helloworld.hello.command";
``` 
There are three parts of interest in this package name:
  * **`io.spine.helloworld`** — this part represents the location of our Hello World “solution”
    as if it were hosted on the web at `https://helloworld.spine.io`.
     
  * **`hello`** — this is the package of the Hello context. In this example we have only one, but
     a real world app would have more. Each Bounded Context goes into a dedicated package.
     
  * **`command`** — this part gathers commands of the context under one package.
     We have only one command in this example, but in real world scenarios, with dozens of commands,
     it is convenient to gather them under a package.  

The following standard proto file option defines the name for the outer class generated by
Protobuf Compiler for this `.proto` file: 
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option java_outer_classname*" 
             end="*option java_outer_classname*"?>  
```proto
option java_outer_classname = "CommandsProto";
```

<p class="note">Outer classes are used by Protobuf implementation internally.
When the `java_outer_classname` option is omitted, Protobuf Compiler would calculate the Java
class name taking the name of the corresponding `.proto` file. 
We recommend setting the name directly to make it straight. This also avoids possible name clashes
with the handcrafted code.</p> 

The next standard option instructs the Protobuf Compiler to put each generated Java type into
a separate file. This way it would be easier to analyze dependencies of the code which uses these
generated types.
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*option java_multiple_files*" 
             end="*option java_multiple_files*"?>  
```proto
option java_multiple_files = true;
```
     
The command for printing a text in a console is defined this way:
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/commands.proto" 
             start="*message Print*" 
             end="*}"?>  
```proto
message Print {

    // The login name of the computer user.
    string username = 1;

    // The text to print.
    string text = 2 [(required) = true];
}
```

By convention, the first field of a command is the ID of the target entity.
This field is required to have a non-empty value so that the command can be dispatched to
the entity. In our case, we identify a console by the login name of the computer user.  

The second field is marked as `(required)` using the custom option imported in
the `spine/options.proto` file above. This command does not make much sense if there is no text
to print.

<p class="note">In Protobuf a data type is either a **`message`** (we can send it) or an **`enum`**.
If you're new to this language, you may want to look at the [Proto3 Language Guide][proto3-guide].  
</p>

Now, let's see how to define events. 

### The `events.proto` file

Events are declared similarly to commands. The header of the file has:

 * The `proto3` syntax declaration.
 * The `hello` package declaration.
 * The import statement for custom Protobuf options used by the framework:
    
    ```proto
    import "spine/options.proto";
    ```

 * The same `(type_url_prefix)` we use in this project.
 * A separate Java package for events of the context:
    
    ```proto
    option java_package="io.spine.helloworld.hello.event";
    ```
 * The outer Java class for all types in this file:
 
    ```proto
    option java_outer_classname = "EventsProto";
    ```     
    
 * The instruction to put Java types into separate files.

    ```proto
    option java_multiple_files = true;
    ```

The sole event in this project is declared this way:

The command for printing a text in a console is defined this way:
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/events.proto" 
             start="*message Printed*" 
             end="*}"?>
```proto 
message Printed {

    // The login name of the user.
    string username = 1 [(required) = true];

    // The printed text.
    string text = 2 [(required) = true];
}
```

The event tells which text was printed for a user. Both of the fields are marked as `(required)`
because the event does not make much sense if one of them is empty. 

<p class="note">
Unlike for commands, the framework does not assume that the first event field is <em>always</em>
populated. This is so because default routing rules for commands and events are different. 
When an event is produced by some entity, it remembers the ID of this producer entity. 
By default, the framework uses the producer ID to route events to their target entities — 
if they have identifiers of the same type.  If the type of producer ID does not match one of the
target entity, then event fields are analyzed. It is also possible to set custom routing rules.
</p>   

Now, let's see the server-side data of the Hello context.

### The `console.proto` file
The header of the file is similar to those we saw in `commands.proto` and `events.proto`. 
The difference is that we use `server` for the proto and Java package names to make sure the 
server-only is not used by the client code.
 
This file defines a single data type. It is the state of the entity handling the `Print` command:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/proto/hello/server/console.proto" 
             start="*message Output*" 
             end="*}"?>
```proto
message Output {
    option (entity) = { kind: PROCESS_MANAGER };

    // The login name of the computer user.
    string username = 1;

    // Text lines of the screen.
    repeated string lines = 2;
}
```

The option `(entity)` tells us that this type is going to be used by a `ProcessManager`.
The first field of the type holds and ID of this entity. The framework assumes such fields as
implicitly `(required)`. Then goes the declaration of the remote screen output.  The value of this
field is empty until something is printed on the screen. Therefore, it is not marked `(required)`.

Now, let's see how this data is used at the server-side.

## The `Console` class

The class is declared this way:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*class Console*" 
             end="*class Console*"?>
```java
final class Console extends ProcessManager<String, Output, Output.Builder> {
```
The generic arguments passed to `ProcessManager` are:
 1. `String` — the type of the ID of the entity. Remember the type
of the first field of the `Print` command?

 2. `Output` — the type of the entity state, which we reviewed in the previous section.

 3. `Output.Builder` — the type used to modify the state of the entity.
    In Protobuf for Java, each message type has a specific builder type. 

### Handling the `Print` command

The command is handled by this method:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*@Assign*" 
             end="    }*"?>
```java
@Assign
Printed handle(Print command) {
    String username = command.getUsername();
    String text = command.getText();
    builder().setUsername(username)
             .addLines(text);
    println(username, text);
    return Printed
            .newBuilder()
            .setUsername(username)
            .setText(command.getText())
            .vBuild();
}
```

Let's review the method in details.

The `@Assign` annotation tells that we assign this method to handle the command which the
method accepts as the parameter. The method returns the event message `Printed`.

The following code obtains the name of the user and the text to print from the received command,
and then applies them to the state of the Process Manager. Instances of the `Console` class store
the text printed for each user.

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*String username*" 
             end="*addLines(text);*"?>
```java
String username = command.getUsername();
String text = command.getText();
builder().setUsername(username)
         .addLines(text);
```
  
Then we print the text to `System.out` so that it becomes visible on the screen:    
<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*println(username*" 
             end="*println(username*"?>
```java
println(username, text);
```

This is done by the method the `Console` class declares:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*private void println(*" 
             end="    }*"?>
```java
private void println(String userName, String text) {
    String output = format("[%s] %s", userName, text);
    System.out.println(output);
}
```

Then, the command-handling method concludes by producing the event message:

<?embed-code file="examples/hello/src/main/java/io/spine/helloworld/server/hello/Console.java" 
             start="*return Printed*" 
             end="*vBuild();*"?>
```java
return Printed
        .newBuilder()
        .setUsername(username)
        .setText(command.getText())
        .vBuild();
```

The `vBuild()` call validates and builds the message. This method is generated by Spine Model
Compiler. For instructions on adding validation attributes to your model please see 
[Validation User Guide]({{site.baseurl}}/docs/guides/validation.html). 

<p class="note">After the event is generated, it is posted to the `EventBus` and delivered to
subscribers automatically. You don't need to write any code for this.</p>  

Now, let's see how the `Console` Process Manager is exposed to the outer world.

## Assembling the Hello Context

<p class="lead">To be continued...</p>
     

[proto3-guide]: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3
