guides/motivation.md, before:

---
layout: docs
title: Motivation
icon: <i class="fa fa-rocket"></i>
---

<h2 class="page-header">Why We Created Spine?</h2>

<div id="toc"></div>

The demands on software projects increase rapidly as time progresses. It means not only codebase is constantly getting more complex, but also business logic constantly changes which require building new functionality, removing old one while serving thousands and billions of people. 
So scalability became an indisputable requirement.

Spine Event Engine is a multi-language, open-source, event sourcing framework that helps developers build scalable and extensible applications by addressing these concerns directly in the architecture. 
This section explains how Spine differs from other frameworks and why we decided to create it.
 

### Spine and Event Store
Spine Event Engine helps build scalable, extensible and maintainable applications by supporting developers apply the Command Query Responsibility Segregation [(CQRS)](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html) architectural pattern and [Event Sourcing](http://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html). It does so by providing implementations of the most important building blocks, such as aggregates, projections and event buses (the dispatching mechanism for events).
Furthermore, using Protocol Buffers, Spine allows easily generate code for multiple clients, hugely saving development team effort.
Spine is inspired by [Event Store](https://geteventstore.com/) with the difference that we do not use JSON Objects for data transmission, which allows to avoid additional transformation and thus has event better performance. Using [Protocol Buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview) allows automatic code generation for events and commands on variety of platforms.

Spine Event Engine also allows to avoid standard DTO model by storing Aggregate State in proto files. That means that data is transferred from the server to client without losses, additional transformations, which also means excellent performance.

Commit message:

Content added
–added content to concepts
–added content to Motivation, Prior Art
–added tutorials drafts for Java

guides/motivation.md, after:

---
layout: docs
title: Motivation
---

<h2 class="page-header">Why We Created Spine?</h2>
 Here is what we want to 

#### Less manual work 
When creating an Event Sourcing application, you need to write classes for commands, events, command handlers, aggregates, aggregates repository, DTOs etc. 
And if your organization wants an application on, let's say a couple of mobile platforms, you would have to add a lot of work to deliver data to each client application. 
So you need to make your code work on another platform by writing it in another language manually, or translate it using tools like [J2ObjC](http://j2objc.org/), or we resort to using just Json in client apps.

Spine aims to free up developers from creating boilerplate code as much as possible. 
Using [Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview) for formulating business domain allows us
 to make this language [ubiquitous](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/UbiquitousLanguage.html) not only in human interaction, but in communication of computing devices too.


#### Less Infrastructure Code
Building modern web applications requires a lot of work for organising storage and data retrieval. As well as supporting communications with multi-platform mobile and browser clients, supporting scaling with microservice-oriented architecture, etc. 

Building on top of [Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview) and [gRPS](http://www.grpc.io/docs/), Spine aims to provide many infrastructure solutions, so that developers can focus on business logic, effective web and mobile UI, etc.


Having absorbed leading [industry experience] (/docs/guides/priorart.html), following steps of [CQRS] (http://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html)and [Event Sourcing](http://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html), we blended multiple concepts and methodologies together to create neat and efficient framework. Key elements and terms we based framework on are reflected in Spine [Concepts](/docs/quides/concepts.html). 


This is an interesting journey for us, journey in progress...
